Very warm greetings, friends. Welcome. Welcome. Thank you. We're here again, which is always
just a bright celebration, honestly. To come together, to reflect on the Dharma, on the
nature, on goodness, on our own goodness, on the goodness of others is such a special opportunity,
and we keep choosing to connect to that, to our goodness and others' goodness. And this
is just such a vibrant, beautiful, loving, wonderful thing we can do with our time, with
our each other. And so thanks for doing that. Thanks for making the time and showing up
and kind of being interested and like, you know, activating this goodness, this brightness
that we all have. And so as we always begin these reflections, our study and practice
with the Dharma, we kind of connect to this brightness that we share. And like Rinpoche's,
because they always say that begins with joint appreciation, or renunciation mind, is gratitude,
like a genuine gratitude for the, all the amazing things we have going for us. And so
we don't have to keep it too far out. We can just keep it really close. You know, the body
I have that's working, you know, the food that I have in my stomach, the language I
speak that I didn't have to create, the air that I breathe, that's not killing me when
I breathe it. I mean, there's so many things, of course, the living thread of Dharma that's
still available, the teachings that have been preserved, the mom and dad and friends that
cared for us when we were little babies, that without them, we wouldn't be able to be here
right now. There's just, we can kind of bring up this list if it helps in our mind, or also
just kind of relax and feel what it feels like to just be here to like, sit, feet on
the ground, kind of have that just a little bit more of this shining appreciation instead
of emphasizing what's off, what's wrong, what's crooked, what's whatever uncomfortable kind
of highlight instead, what's really lovely. And that's just how we're turning our mind
to what is a lovely part of my experience now. And so that's the first part of poisoning
our mind for it to shine out its own goodness, the loveliness of what's outside and what's
inside. And then secondly, to emphasize more what's good outside, this special quality
we all have, this goodness in Buddhism, they call it Buddha nature, but there's this good
heart. So to really remember that, I have a good heart, you have a good heart, we have
really good heart, this beautiful, bright intelligence we have, and to kind of, while
we have this intelligence, we also go through so many challenges and ups and downs, and
we really know this, the tension, the body tension, mind tension, all these tensions.
So none of us want that. We all want to be happy. So why are we doing this? Why do we
study the Dharma? Why are we reflecting on it? Why are we trying to put it into practice
and have our minds brighten, have our hearts open? So all beings can connect to their own
goodness, their own brightness, their own loveliness. So this bodhicitta, heart-mind
of enlightenment, really kind of activate that. May this be of direct and immediate
benefit for every single being to just fully actualize their own wonderful, boundless nature
of wisdom and compassion, the bodhicitta. And then thirdly, this pure perception or
Vajra pride, this clear seeing, when the mind isn't kind of so fixated, so tense, so frustrated,
so kind of collapsed in on itself, that when it's not doing that, it's going to be relaxed,
open, buoyant, fresh, vivid, connected, embodied. It's very present. It's very engaged. It's
like sizzling with energy. And so there's a lot of ways to unpack this. But in general,
we can call this like a divine mandala filled with divine beings. This is like a very harmonious
set of conditions, and we're a part of that, each of us. So pure body, pure speech, pure
mind, deity, mantra, Dharmakaya, this kind of really bring up this courageous view that
this goodness is everywhere, outside, inside, all around, in between. This is all goodness.
So kind of rest in that instead of feeling like there's some big problem to solve, some
big fire to put out, something wrong to write. Instead of that, just relax. And I'm saying
this right to myself. Hey, Drakpa, just relax. This is good. Don't have to really change
something. So with this joy, connect with others with a really genuine good heart, just
relax. This is already so good. Let me just do that together for a moment. Thank you.
So we have a brief little window of time to kind of reflect on the Dharma. And there's
so many angles and ways we can unpack natural systems, our nature, our mind, what's outside,
what's inside. So today I've kind of chosen a little theme. Like I do, it's helpful for
me to kind of think of a little corner of the maze of reality and to kind of play in
that space for a little while. So today's theme is holding one's feet to the fire by
joyfully embracing voluntary simplicity, holding one's own feet to the fire, by joyfully embracing
voluntary simplicity. So a lot lately I've been thinking about what is it to be a living
breathing being in the middle of a web of living breathing things that come together
in part to integrate and disintegrate. You know, just all the things of the gushy, messy,
uncontrolled, flexing, living nature of being a human in a world that we can't control.
And largely with a body that I can't control and a mind that I definitely seem to not be
able to control. Jump, jump, jump. So I've been thinking about that a lot. And so holding
one's own feet to the fire by joyfully embracing voluntary simplicity. So I decided on this
topic and then I was thinking after I decided on this a couple days ago, right afterwards,
I saw a video and I just showed this to Lama Lai recently. And you might have seen it,
the first Matrix movie, 1999, 24 years ago. Okay, there's a scene in this first Matrix
movie. And it's the first time when Morpheus introduces Neo to the construct. This is a
giant boundless white space where all of a sudden Keanu Reeves Neo pops up and Lawrence
Fishburne Morpheus pops up and they look like themselves. And it's this holding space where
they could just put any program in there and all of a sudden the white area, the white
world system with these two Neo and Morpheus can be populated by anything they want. Nature,
weapons, a city, a jump training program, anything. They're in the middle of a program.
But they seem real to themselves and to each other. And they can populate this giant blank
white space with anything they want. Maybe you remember the scene. I'll link to it if
you're watching this video. Look below. Okay, two days ago, this became reality. Mark Zuckerberg
put out the first interview in the metaverse. And what does it look like? A giant boundless
white space with Mark Zuckerberg standing in it and the interviewer, Lex Friedman, standing
in it. And it's nearly indistinguishable from real life, from their bodies. They're talking,
moving, their lighting changes, the emotionality changes. So this scene from this Matrix movie
1999 is now real. So we're two days into that. So you'll see, maybe if you're older and not
interested in this, if you're younger and you have a phone and you have some money to
get some headset goggles within the year, you'll know this space a lot more than today.
This is no longer science fiction. This is no longer a movie. So the question is, how
am I going to populate that space? How are you going to populate that space? A giant
boundless, frameless white space that doesn't follow the laws of physics? Where you can
show up in any way you want? Where you can do anything you want? In any language you
want? With whoever you want? So the topic is holding oneself to the fire, one's feet
to the fire. And another way of looking at this, how do I hold myself accountable? Responsibility.
We're entering a time where I can literally create the, I can populate my world that I
experience with anything I want and it will seem real. So how do I hold myself accountable
in that? This is a very interesting window that we're entering in. Because any living
system that actually thrives over time, it has constraints. It has boundaries. It has
membranes. It has things that can and cannot do. Living systems have to be in touch with
each other. The water has to be in touch with the wind and the fire and the metal and the
earth and the beings have to be in touch with each other. And the food we eat goes through
our bodies and it has to be in touch with our organs and it transports and transforms
and excretes and becomes the earth and that becomes soil and a tree which would take,
I mean, the whole cycle of systems of interacting things that bind each other. It's not a giant
open white room. These are lived embodied systems that interact with each other. And we're about
to enter a time where a lot of people's time is going to not be in that realm. You put
on the headset, you put on the ear set and you can populate a living very seemingly real
world with anything you want. So what does that do to us as bodhisattvas? How do I hold
myself accountable in that kind of boundless space? This is boundless, not in the sense
of boundaries that fold into more boundaries. This is in the sense of I can do whatever
I want without limit. This is not natural, boundaried systems of interdependence. This
is just ego clinging without limit. And what's going to happen when we have a shared space
that we co-create? Like where are the rules that you want to be a purple unicorn speaking
Swahili and I'm going to translate that into Spanish as a penguin that morphs into a cactus
that it's just it's about to become anything. And it's going to be normal, the norm, the
mainstream thing. If you think it's not true, go in public and see how many people don't
have a smartphone glued to their face. This is only 14 years old. It looks odd to see
someone in public that doesn't have a smartphone in their hand. It looks odd. So the point
here isn't to point fingers and say what are other people doing, but what am I going to
do? How am I going to populate my world? How am I going to interact with my world? Because
we're already doing that. It's just a less powerful framework in a way. We're already
choosing to be in a place, in a time. Am I going to have kids or not? Am I going to work
at this job or not? Am I going to respond with kindness or not? Am I going to wake up
super stressed? Am I going to sit down and meditate? These are all choices, right? And
the problem with embodied, embedded choices is that every choice involves grief, samsara,
conditioned existence. Whatever we choose, we give up all the things we didn't choose.
And there's a knowledge of that, of duality mind, like I don't get all these other options.
And there's like an aching there. I can't do whatever I want. I have to actually choose
something and be with it and not be with all the other things. I have to choose a nundro
practice, not just jump between practices, right? I have to choose a time and a place.
I have to be an embedded, embodied, living, dynamic being in a world where I have to care
for the world I'm in. And I have to show up on the terms of the world and the people in
it that are around me that I'm affecting, that I'm affected by. So we're already choosing
what we train ourselves in. It doesn't have to be some video game blank thing. And then
we get to choose what world we want to live in. That's just a very exaggerated way of
kind of like basically letting narcissism do anything it wants. So it's a lot of power
for baby mind. And there's going to be a lot of heartbreak with that and a lot of devastation.
Too much power. Too much power, not ready. How can I tell this? This scholar indigenous
aboriginal person, an Appalachian clan, Tyson Yankoporta. I've been really interested in
his work lately. Read his book a few years ago, Sand Talk. And in it he makes many, many,
many profound, very kind of provocative comments. Sand Talk, Tyson Yankoporta. And one thing
he mentions is what are the kinds of questions that are asked by an adolescent culture? By
an immature culture. Question number one, who am I? Number two, what's my purpose? Number
three, what happens after I die? Why is this adolescent and immature? More mature cultures
don't ask this question. Why? Because who am I? What's my purpose? What happens after
I die? It's all about me. And mature cultures know there's a lot more going on in the world
than just me. We happen to be in a mature culture like that. We're bodhisattvayana. What's
the main bodhisattvayana question? What serves? What serves? How can I be of better service?
This is such a deeply mature, such a profound question. How can I care for you more thoroughly?
Because the recognition is the nature of my mind is naturally compassionate. It's naturally
intelligent. It's naturally interconnected. If I serve you, it serves me. If I create
a nourishing, flourishing situation, like I'm naturally like buoyed up and just fulfilled
by that. This is the great Shanti Deva said that the root of every trouble is thinking
what about me? And the cause of every happiness is thinking what about you? And we've heard
this so many times and it's still true. It's such deep, hardcore Vajrayana, bodhicitta.
It's the beating heart. So if we use AI in the giant big blank boundless room and we
say how do I create a world that serves more beings? It's more educational. It's more heartfelt.
It's more uplifting. It's more of service to whoever else shares that space. Then fine,
AI is going to be an amazing power tool for bodhisattva activity. And there'll be some
beings that use it like that, just like TV. TV could be the best educational tool that
ever existed. Radio, smart phone, it's all the same. The trajectory of going of that
oral traditions, into written traditions, into radio, into TV, into internet, smart phone,
now headset, embodied gear stuff. It's the power, we're accessing more and more power
of interconnection. Technology is letting our mind have a bigger effect that's faster.
But are we ready for that power? Because if the main driving question is what about me?
Me first. I'm so special, right? Again, this Tyson Yanka Porta says what indigenous try,
indigenous clans of all types, the fundamental question they've all circled around to prevent
is the root thought. I'm more special. Ego clinging. Buddhism is one of these indigenous
cultures. Isn't it? Tibetan Buddhism goes back to the eighth century. Indian Buddhism,
Mayana Buddhism goes back to the 600 or so, you know BCE. This is definitely an indigenous
culture. It's a very ancient wisdom tradition. So what do I want to populate this world with?
We're already choosing that. Now we get a headset that really viscerally lets us see
what choice we're making and we get feedback that comes very fast. But if we think we're
outside of a system of cause and effect, if we think space and time doesn't matter, so
much of our body intelligence is about space and time. What is happening around me? What
are the cues I get? The smells, the taste, the breeze, the texture, the light, like all
this is me in space and all this intelligence comes to locate interdependence in time and
space. Right? The great master Nagarjuna is like, we only recognize the absolute through
the relative, through the relational, through the relationality, the relationships, the
connectivity
of being an embodied, embedded mind and heart and all this gushy, messy juiciness of human
hood. In other words, that's just human. There's insects and bugs and gundarvas and all these
different types of beings often works. I'm so human centric. Again, we'll see what happens
with that once these AI systems get much smarter than humans in terms of their computational
ability. That's coming so fast now. High human IQ, this propositional belief structure knowledge,
high IQ for humans 120. That's about a normal average. It's a high normal. Einstein had
160. The current chat GPT4 has 150. It went from 120ish to 150 in about six months. If
it's on the same trajectory, six months from now, it's going to be about what? 190? Six
months later, so a year from now, what? 320? What is it like when we're interacting with
a system that has the double IQ of a human, of a normal human on the street? That's going
to be like a squirrel interacting with a human, but we're the squirrel. This program, whether
it's sentient or not, we're not even going to understand it. That's what's coming in
a year. This is right here right now. If we thought we were going to avoid this whole
thing, we're not. It's here. Just this week, all these AI systems, Google, Microsoft, and
all these things, they've already integrated AI in all the things they use now. You don't
have to go to some separate thing. It's in the thing. You get Microsoft Word, AI is in
it. You use phone programs, the AI is in it. There's not an escape. If you use electricity,
it's here and now. The question really that I'm circling around is how to be responsible
in the web of connections that I'm in, that I'm a part of, that make me what I am, the
relationships. How do I be accountable in that and responsible in that? Because that's
what a very foundational Buddhist, Theravada, that's such a deep, deep question. How can
I show up to my circumstances properly? For Bodhisattvas, they just magnify that question
basically without limit. What serves now for all time and space endlessly for every being
until they're all free of suffering? It means how can I be most effective now to help Buddha
nature turn on a little more brightly now? It's very intimate. It's very fertile and
messy and very much about what is happening around me and in me right now. So there's
some Dharma quotes around this. So here's Ajahn Chah, the great master Ajahn Chah, a
book being Dharma. And I read, "This is so helpful." When planting is page 118. When
planting a tree, if you want to do it the right way and get fruit from it, how should
you go about it in order to have a relaxed mind? You should do that which is your responsibility.
Getting hold of the sapling is your job. Digging the hole is your job. Planting it, fertilizing
it and watering it and keeping the insects off, it is your job. That's it. Stop there.
How fast or slow it grows isn't your job. Let go of this part. You make the causes in
planting and taking care of the tree but you don't think when will it be fully grown? When
will there be fruit? That isn't your business. It's the plants. If you think, "I've watered
it and all the rest, now how can I force it to grow faster?" That won't help. It isn't
your responsibility. But there's a connection. If you've done your work properly, the tree
is bound to grow according to nature. If you think like this, you will be okay. If you
want it to grow in a day or two after all your hard work, that's mistaken. There's
no happiness that way. Don't think about it too much at this point. It's a matter of
making causes. If the causes are good, the result is bound to be good because all things
are born of causes. We have our duties so we do them to the full. But we act without
attachment, taking care of our own responsibilities. If we try to take care of the tree's
responsibilities,
we will get upset. The important thing is to make the causes good. Then the result will
be good. If we think like this, there will be a lightness of mind. Otherwise, we are
doing others' work, watching the tree today, going back to watch it tomorrow, trying to
see it grow.
So Ajahn Chah goes on, but responsibility, accountability, knowing like what am I actually
responsible for? What have I promised? What have I committed to? Where have I really said,
you know, I will go deep here. I will care for this. And like trying to do that as fully
as possible, as intelligently as possible, as carefully, as full of care as possible.
That's my responsibility. But I don't have control over the whole system. I don't get
to choose all the features that populate an entire world that I'm a part of. That is very
wishful thinking. And it's really toxic because I don't have the intelligence to make that
choice. And there's no such being that has that omnipotence. The Buddha clearly taught
there's no such being as an omnipotent being that doesn't that doesn't exist. Even the
Buddha wasn't omnipotent. He was omniscient. He knew the vast network of causes and conditions
that were called relative truth.
So knowing like, what's my responsibility? What am I caring for? And how can I plant
the proper causes and conditions to orient towards the result that I seek, which is the
happiness of all beings, the enlightenment of all beings. So that's one kind of way to
dip in. Then I have a lot, there's a lot of quotes. So this in another way is like kind
of sometimes for people, it's like trigger word, or it's just like a boring word or not
interesting word, renunciation mind. This is what we're talking about. How do I show up
in my life, actually fully and be responsible for what is on my plate? How do I take responsibility
accountability for like my mind, my own mind, for my mind, not for the world or not for
your mind, for my mind, because I have the power to actually be responsible for my mind,
which is also interesting in the AI land. Maybe some people think, Oh, what you do in there
doesn't really matter. It's like a video game. You get together with your friends, you know,
you play a shooter game, you shoot each other, it's all fun and games, then you stop and
you're like in real world. But more and more, this is not going to be true. More and more,
this is going to be the real world that people are in. And that's just normal everyday worldly
perspective. The second thing is, from the Buddhist perspective, every instant you do
something with your mind, it shapes the mind. Whether that's in a dream, waking, deep sleep
in a video game, watching a movie, writing something, reading something, the mind is
being influenced. It's the superpower of the mind. It can influence and be influenced.
So like, be careful what causes and conditions you put yourself in, because the mind will
shape according to them.
So there's a quote from Zoczar Jami and Kenseter Imbache. It's a Facebook thing he did in 2020.
Some say the dark age, the age of vice, the Kalyuga is here now, or at least coming soon.
What determines if an age is dark or golden? What are the symptoms or omens? Earthquakes,
violet skies, meteoric activity, these are not the omens of doomsday, as we are made
to believe. Likewise, cherubs flying, a sound economy, freedom of information, peaceful
times are also not necessarily times of a golden age. The age of light is said to be
when people value empathy and forgiveness, when they have a willingness to see other
people's view, and are contented with what they have. When such values are systematically
sabotaged, then you can say that the dawn of the doomsday has begun. When we look at
a harmless beggar and see it as a pest, and envy billionaires who routinely destroy the
Earth, we are inviting doomsday to come.
Again another quote from Zoczar Jami and Kenseter Imbache is on a recent talk he gave, contemporary
Buddhist perspective on myth, language, globalization, and societal values. This is in 2020. Zoczar
and Kenseter Imbache said, "If Buddhism boils down to don't eat meat, smile, be gentle,
be kind, be helpful, behave well, then Buddhism is dead. I'm sure there will be a lot of good
people walking around, but there will be no Buddhists."
So the third quote, again, Zoczar and Kenseter Imbache, YouTube video 2020. We talk about
how samsara is useless, samsara is suffering, all of that, but that's not the real reason
for renunciation. The real reason for renunciation of samsara is because samsara is shunyata.
It doesn't exist. There is no ignorance. There's also no end of ignorance. There is no death.
There's no end of death. There are no four noble truths. This was taught by the same
guy who taught the four noble truths. You need to know this. This is the brilliance of Shakyamuni
Buddha. This is so deep. So not only is it about being in relationality with responsibility
and accountability, but understanding that if we really look closely enough at relationships,
the relationality in my own mind, my own heart, my own body, with my own close ones and strangers
and enemies and all beings, if I really look closely at that relationality, the relationship,
the relative truth, I'll see that there's only relationship. I'll only ever find more
vast nuanced networks of relationality. There is no fixed thing happening. It's just a dynamic
interplay of cause, condition, and effect. And in Buddhism, that's called wisdom or
prajna, insight. There is no fundamental thing there. Not outside, not inside, not in between.
And that's really hard for most minds. It's definitely hard for my mind. Some people call
that nowadays, it's kind of trending, liminality, liminal, the in between, the bardo. Tibetan
Buddhists talked about the bardo, that all of this life and experience is a bardo. This
is baked into Tibetan Buddhist Devadriana view. Bardo in between, it's always shifting, changing.
Everything's amorphous. There is no fixed final frame. And that's the fundamental uncertainty
that each mind has to come to terms with in order for it not to keep suffering. This is
all uncertain. Everything's constantly moving. And we say that impermanence, impermanence,
impermanence. But how much do we really believe that? Are we really willing to be with that
level of uncertainty? Because when we're not, that's the root cause of suffering. I want
to be set, stable, in control, ego clinging. I do that so much all the time. I'm not saying
I'm out of that. I'm totally in that. That's why I can talk with it, you know, like authentically
a little. Suffering hurts. It really hurts. But if I look closely enough at suffering,
the sufferer, right? This is where Buddhism takes the question of who am I? And it really
opens that in a mature way. Who am I? There's no I there. There's no suffering there. If
I really look closely and then what do I find? I find connection, relationality. That's why
the question of what serves is such a burning question for bodhisattvas. How can I help
with these relationships? Like the relational network I'm a part of. Not how can I plug
and play whatever I want to see around me and however I want to look. That's just a
doomed game. It's really, we'll see. We're at the very beginning, day two. So we'll see
where it goes. What Buddha Shakyamuni taught, we're in an age of degeneration, where the
narrowing of mind is definitely narrowing. And if we take narcissism, for example, and
we always put me first as the most special, important center of the universe, and then
I can do whatever I want with these power tools, and then everyone's trying to do that,
we really will see that's not going to create a lot of harmonious collective togetherness.
There's going to be a lot of conflict. Or at least a whole lot of confusion. All right,
one more quote. I mean, for right now, I'm coming, I'll wrap up. "Going into this bodhicitta
or the kind of burning heart of the bodhisattva yana, the bodhisattva path, those courageous
for enlightenment, for all beings." And this is a quote of Venerable Kempa Ramache from
Illuminating the Path. This is the Dijam Terasarnandra book. It's page 93. This is such a powerful,
powerful quote, such a special book. "Without bodhicitta, there are no Buddhas, bodhisattvas
or enlightenment. There's only confusion based on ego games and selfishness. If we do not
have bodhicitta, we are not actually taking refuge, even if we go through the motions.
Without it, our efforts are forced, uptight, and meaningless. With bodhicitta, we acquire
skillful means. We become kind and gentle, and our practice becomes more powerful, beneficial,
and beautiful. When Buddha Shakyamuni was alive, there was a famous king named Prasanajit who
ruled much of northern India from his capital in Shrivasti. He was very devoted to the Buddha,
but did not have a lot of time to practice because of his worldly duties. His heart was
with the Buddha, but he couldn't connect deeply with the Dharma. This worried him. So one day,
he asked the Buddha what to do. The Buddha said, "If you can do only one practice, you will be
applying yourself all the time." "What would that be?" asked the king. "It is generating bodhicitta
,"
said the Buddha. "Bring bodhicitta into each of your daily activities, whether you're standing,
walking, sitting, or sleeping. While you're governing the kingdom or whatever you're doing,
if you keep bodhicitta in your heart, it will transform all of your actions into the practice
of the Dharma." Then again, from illuminating the path, page 96, Patra Rinpoche also said
that without bodhicitta, so this is the reverse side, so that was the sweet uplifting. This is
the reverse, the little strong. Patra Rinpoche also said that without bodhicitta firmly established
in your heart, even if you've memorized the zogchen tantras and can quote all the Mahamudra
texts, you're merely paying lip service to the Dharma. He said that no matter how vast your
view is, without bodhicitta, whatever you say is the doctrine of demons. He felt strongly about
this, saying that people who talk about their experiences of bliss and emptiness and bhatriyana
practice without having bodhicitta as a foundation should have their mouths stuffed with the
garbage
of nine cities. Bodhicitta, right? That's the answer. And then the next little thing, quote,
this is from B. Allen Wallace. In his book, Attention Revolution, page 150, "We have two
challenges that are at the heart of zogchen. Do not let the vision be buried by your life,
by economics, politics, and so on. Do not let the vision get lost while you're cut up in what
happens on a day-to-day basis. This is the first challenge. The second is do not let your vision of
the middle way, the vision of the great perfection, stifle your interest in day-to-day affairs,
your
life, your family, the political situation, among others. Do not let vision exclude life situations
as if they did not matter because they do. Keep in mind this expression, stillness in front of the
movement." Stillness in front of the movement. So like how can I be accountable, responsible? How
can I hold my feet to the fire? What does that even mean? How can I show up in my life in a way
that actually cares about my life and it cares about the people around me? And I care about this
continuing in a lovely way and I care about the lineage and I care about the teachings being
preserved. Like how can I do that? I have to pay attention to them but in a light way, in an open
way, a spacious way, but it actually means I have to listen to them. I do have to listen to others.
I have to listen to what's happening. I have to pay attention and slow down and wait. What's
going on in the situation? What's going on in my mind? I have to like patiently like give myself
the time and space to be with what is happening. Not to just make it however I want it, but to
actually be with the world. Be in the world with it. Be with people as they are, but not get so
tense around who they are and who I am and what's the relationship. Do it with a big view.
This is just a moment we share. How can bring some buoyancy, brightness, loveliness to this
little fleeting moment? This is becoming a memory as it happens and it's a memory I'll soon forget,
but it's still going to have an imprint on my mind and my heart. It's still going right into
my alaya, the Buddha nature, and is it going to uncover it and make my Buddha nature shine
more brightly? Or is it going to cover my Buddha nature and kind of wrap myself in more wounds and
more scars and more kind of distorted closed view perception? So time's at the end for this.
Really, this book is so sweet. A flash of lightning in the dark of night, a guide to the
bodhisattva's way of life with a commentary by his Holiness Dalai Lama. The translation of the
shanti deva's bodhicharya avatara, the bodhisattva way of life. It's so beautiful. It's so
beautiful
in this book. So I wanted to read one. I mean, it's the translation. It's so beautiful.
But this is his Holiness Dalai Lama speaking about bodhichitta. He's worked so hard at such
a dire time for the Tibetan people for so many decades. And then quote page 97.
When people say that I have worked a lot for peace, I feel embarrassed.
I feel like laughing. I don't think that I've done very much for world peace.
It's just that my practice is the peaceful path of kindness, love, compassion, and not harming
others. This has become part of me. It's not something for which I have specially volunteered.
I'm simply a follower of the Buddha. And the Buddha taught that patience is the supreme means
for transcending suffering. He said, if a monk harms others, he is not a monk. I am a Buddhist
monk. So I try to practice accordingly. When people think this practice is something unique
and special and call me a leader of world peace, I almost feel ashamed. A good heart is the source
of all happiness and joy. And we can all be good hearted if we make an effort. But better still is
to have bodhichitta, which is a good heart imbued with wisdom. It is the strong desire to attain
enlightenment in order to deliver all beings from suffering and bring them to Buddhahood.
This thought of helping others is rooted in compassion, which grows from a feeling of
gratitude and love for beings who are afflicted by suffering.
Traditionally, there are two methods for developing this sort of care and gratitude.
One is to reflect on the fact that all beings have at some time in the succession of their lives
been our parents or at least close friends, so that we naturally feel grateful to them
and wish to take on their suffering in exchange for our happiness. The other method is to
understand
that others suffer in the same way as we do, to see that we are all equal and to reflect on what
is wrong with egotism and on the advantages of altruism. We can use whichever of these two
methods suits us best or practice them both together. So this is equalizing, exchanging,
and eventually seeing others is more important. This is so core of the way of the bodhisattva.
So when we get in our AI simulation, which is definitely coming, if you think you're going to
be one of the people in the public sphere who doesn't have a headset on engaging with this
a couple years from now, just recognize if you're one of the people now who
doesn't have a smartphone in your hand all the time when you're with people.
We happen to be at a hermitage place where that's kind of rare here
because Wi-Fi is bad and we intentionally keep it bad.
What happens when you just can't do whatever you want? You have to actually pay it to slow
down and show up to like, "What's happening around me already? How can I listen and tune
in to what's actually around me?" And not just change it the way I want to change it.
I use the internet all the time. I'm sure I'll try out the headset thing. If we can use this
to creatively co-create beautiful, uplifted, mutually, reciprocally, just nourishing bodhicitta
full context, containers, worlds, communications, art, technological innovations, I'm totally for
it. That's the very positive side of this time. If you have bodhisattvas using this kind of thing,
the outreaching bodhicitta activity is enhanced. But if it's just selfishness that's empowered to
do what it wants more, that's the kind of opaque narrow side of the power, this kind of inter
connectivity.
So then holding my own feet to the fire, I actually have to pay attention to the relations
that I'm a part of because that's actually where I have so much power to be influenced by them and
to influence, to really learn. And then what's this part? By joyfully choosing or embracing
voluntary simplicity, I have to choose to go deep here. None of us can go do everything we want all
the time. We have to actually grow some roots somewhere if we want to go deep. That's voluntary
simplicity. We choose, consciously choose to care for something, a relationship, a quality of mind,
a practice, a lineage. We're choosing to grow it, to really care for it, and we can't force it to
grow fast. It'll do what it does. It's a vast web of cause, condition, and effect. But we can
definitely take responsibility for our part in that, our loving touch of being embodied in touch
with living systems that we're a part of right now. So thank you all. That's kind of, to some
degree,
a plea, and then also to some degree, just a beautiful kind of pause to reconnect to these
core essential teachings of the Buddha. And now we'll kind of go in this very incubator
context of the Dujum Ter Cernundro, where we get to hold ourselves accountable to this lineage
system that's just designed for us to brighten all of our Buddha nature activities and qualities.
So really genuinely thank you, and thanks for kind of this opportunity to practice together
this, these sacred sublime teachings.
Can I say a final little wrap up? That's great. Thank you. Thank you all.
Isn't it just so tender to be us? I find it very tender to be a human being, and at this time too,
but just now, it's just a tender thing. And I think part of why it's, part of the
specialness of it is it's just really vulnerable. It's vulnerable to be in a body with a mind
that's so sensitive. It has so much capacity to tune in to what's happening around, outside,
inside. It's so sensitive, and it's that vulnerability, the sensitivity, like that's actually
kind of where we recognize we're a part of something so much bigger than ourselves.
Like we're deeply connected with this living world and all these living peace people and
relationships. And when we like kind of recognize that like the power or the kind of like the
beauty
of it is like in the, it's in the kind of connecting and in the interweaving. That's actually where
like
the Dharma I think kind of really is alive. And so as Dharma people, as Buddhists, we also have
these living ecologies that we're a part of. And they're lineage ecologies. And that's part of the
power and beauty and strength of practitioners. We have the support of all these lineage structures
.
And there's a beautiful quote by Tinley Novarumice. It's a short quote, and it's really
powerful and impactful for me. It's in his book, "Ruby Rosary," Tinley Novarumice. And it says,
page 230, "For those of us who presume to be followers of the Buddha, if we can each perfect
our learning and contemplation within a particular yana that corresponds to our individual
faculties
and inclinations with its own threefold system of basis, path and result, then even though it may
seem as if we've not served the Buddha's teachings in vast ways, in fact, it is the most beneficial
and not allowing the teachings of Buddha Shakyamuni to be contradicted or ruined from within."
So whatever corner of reality of the world that we happen to be in, wherever our home is, wherever
our body is, if we can care for it on like how it is in relationship to what it's a part of,
and in this living context of a lineage, if we can within a yana, if we can like stay with a view,
meditation, conduct, and fruition of that specific yana and not break it to actually show up on the
terms of what the living system is that we're a part of, then that's the doorway to liberation.
But if we aren't vulnerable and instead we try to just only control our situation or kind of
overstep the bounds, the boundaries of like what a living ecology actually takes to continue,
if we're kind of reckless in that, then it won't sustain. It's actually in the surrendering to
like the living system that we're a part of, that's actually where we get to be connected
with everything that exists, and like that's kind of the doorway into emptiness or interdependence.
So thank you. We're deeply ecological beings, like in every way we look at it,
and so thanks for being a part of this living system. So happy. Thank you.